[dvsim] Testplanner refactor & covergroup support (#6479)
lowRISC/opentitan: util/dvsim/doc/testplanner.md

    A testpoint that focuses on erasing a page within a `flash_ctrl` bank would be called `page_erase`.
    The recommended naming convention to follow is `<main_feature>_<sub_feature>_<sub_sub_feature_or_type>_...`.
    This is no need to suffix (or prefix) the testpoint name with "test".

* **milestone: targeted verification milestone**

    This is either `V1`, `V2` or `V3`.
    It helps us track whether all of the testing requirements of a milestone have been achieved.

* **desc: testpoint description**

    A multi-line string that briefly describes the intent of the test.
    It is recommended, but not always necessary to add a high level goal, stimulus, and the checking procedure so that the reader gets a clear idea of what and how the said feature is going to be tested.

    Full [Markdown]({{< relref "doc/rm/markdown_usage_style" >}}) syntax is supported when writing the description.

* **tests: list of written test(s) for a testpoint**

    The testplan is written in the initial work stage of the verification [life-cycle]({{< relref "doc/project/development_stages#hardware-verification-stages" >}}).

>     Later, when the DV engineer writes the tests, it may not map one-to-one to a testpoint - it may be possible that a written test satisfactorilly addresses multiple testpoints; OR it may also be possible that a testpoint needs to be split into multiple smaller tests.

Reviewer: Nit: Singular/plural mismatch. Maybe "... writes the tests, they may not map..." ?

> ---

Reviewer 2: Did you render this? I wish github could render md files in reviews.

Reviewer 3: It can. In the Files tab, click on the "document" icon:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1467123/118009405-ee79b100-b345-11eb-97b2-b3d3172e688a.png)

Reviewer 2: Thanks Philipp, yet some of the links are shown as
... The skeleton [DV document]({{< relref "dv_methodology/index.md#dv-document" >}}) and ...
instead of an actual link. Maybe it is a feature?

Reviewer 3: Markdown has many dialects. GitHub only renders "github flavored markdown", while we're using "Hugo markdown". So some features, including the links, are not rendered properly in the GitHub preview.

If you'd like to see how the pages really look, you need to check out the pull request and run `./util/build_docs.py --preview` locally.

Reviewer 2: Got it, thanks.

title: "testplanner tool"
---

testplanner is a Python based tool for parsing testplans written in Hjson
format into a data structure that can be used for:

> * Expanding the testplan inline within the DV document as a table

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Expanding the testplan inline within the DV document as a table;
```

Reviewer 2: Well, sentences need punctuation: choose any that makes sense, but typically only titles don't have one at the end.

Author: Okay, done.

> * Annotating the simulation results with testplan entries for a document driven

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Annotating the simulation results with testplan entries for a document driven;
```

  DV execution

Please see [DV methodology]({{< relref "doc/ug/dv_methodology/index.md#documentation" >}})
for more details on the rationale and motivation for writing and maintaining testplans
in a machine-parsable format (`Hjson`).

> This document will focus on the anatomy of a Hjson testplan, list of features supported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document will focus on the anatomy of an Hjson testplan, the list of features supported,
```

and some of the ways of using the tool.

## Hjson testplan

A testplan consists of a list of testpoints (planned tests) and a list of
planned coverage items (covergroups).

### Testpoints

A testpoint is an entry in the testplan representing a planned test. A planned

> test maps 1:1 to a uniquely testable feature of the design. Minimally, the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
test maps one-to-one to a uniquely testable feature of the design. Minimally, the
```

> test maps 1:1 to a uniquely testable feature of the design. Minimally, the

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I am afraid the comments above are missing the gist of this PR. The counter-examples mentioned are "tests" (stress_all, smoke). In my opinion the distinction between testpoints and tests is valid. I tend to think of what is referred to here as "testpoint" as a "design feature"; for example, AES should encrypt per the spec, and AES should decrypt per the spec for the block sizes supported. These testpoints can be verified by any number of tests DV engineers decide to write.

> test maps 1:1 to a uniquely testable feature of the design. Minimally, the

Reviewer: @matutem: I understand the distinction that you're making, but I think the things listed in this file under the name "testpoint" *are* stress_all, smoke etc. Which is why I'm saying that this might be mis-named.

> test maps 1:1 to a uniquely testable feature of the design. Minimally, the

Reviewer 2: Hmm? Each testpoint can include a list of tests, which can be any of the tests written, and that is just fine: we need to attach actual tests somewhere. I also gather any given test can be attached to multiple testpoints, which also makes sense. But I doubt we should create a testpoint for a generic test like stress_all. Perhaps Sri can clarify this further?

> test maps 1:1 to a uniquely testable feature of the design. Minimally, the

Reviewer: Thanks, this is clearer, I think.

following items are sufficient to adequately capture the intent of a planned
test:
* **name: name of the planned test**

    This is a single `lower_snake_case` string that succinctly describes the intended

>     feature being tested. As an example, a smoke test which is typically the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    feature being tested. As an example, a smoke test, which is typically the
```

>     first test written on a brand new testbench would be simply named `smoke`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    first test written on a brand new testbench, would simply be named `smoke`.
```

* **milestone: verification milestone**

    This is one of {"`V1`", "`V2`" and "`V3`"}. This allows us to concretely indicate
    that all goals for a particular milestone have been achieved and we can
    transition to the next.

* **desc: description of the planned test**

    A multi-line string that briefly describes the intent of the test. It is

>     recommended to add a high level goal, stimulus and checking procedure so

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    recommended to add a high level goal, stimulus, and checking procedure so
```

    that the reader gets the full picture of what and how the said feature is being
    tested.

    Full [Markdown]({{< relref "doc/rm/markdown_usage_style" >}}) syntax is supported
    when writing the description.

* **tests: list of actual written tests that maps to this planned test**

    The testplan is written in the initial work stage of the verification
    [life-cycle]({{< relref "doc/project/development_stages#hardware-verification-stages" >}}).

>     When the DV engineer gets to actually developing the test, it may not map 1:1 to

Reviewer 4: should that be "When the DV engineer gets to actually develop the test"

Reviewer: I think Sri's text is right. It's short for "gets around to actually developing" (whereas your version means "is allowed to actually develop")

Reviewer 4: haha thanks Rupert for explaining it. I am fine either way, could be just my bad english haha.

Reviewer 2: Grammar-wise this is incorrect: remove the adverb and it says "gets to developing the", which is certainly wrong. I am a big fan of E. B. White "The Elements of Style" (great read by the way), and it would recommend rewriting this as "... engineer develops the ...", so my other comment to this line is also undesirable.

>     When the DV engineer gets to actually developing the test, it may not map 1:1 to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    When the DV engineer gets to actually develop the test, it may not map one-to-one to
```

    the planned test - it may be possible that an already written test that mapped
    to another planned test also satisfies the current one; OR it may also be
    possible that the planned test needs to be split into multiple smaller tests.
    To cater to these needs, we provide the ability to set a list of actual written
    tests that maps to each planned test. This information will then be used to map
    the simulation results and annotate them to the testplan to generate the final
    table. This list does not have to be populated right away. It can be updated

>     as and when tests are written.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    as tests are written.
```

>     as and when tests are written.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    as tests are written.
```

If need arises, more entries can be added to this list relatively easily.

Testplan entries are added using the `testpoints` key, which is a list that
looks like this:
```hjson
  testpoints: [
    {
      name: feature1
      milestone: V1

>       desc: '''**Goal**: High level goal of this test

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      desc: '''**Goal**: High level goal of this test.
```

            **Stimulus**: Describe the stimulus procedure.

            **Check**: Describe the checking procedure.'''
      tests: ["foo_feature1"]
    }
    {
      name: feature2
      milestone: V2

>       desc: '''**Goal**: High level goal of this test

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      desc: '''**Goal**: High level goal of this test.
```

            **Stimulus**: Describe the stimulus procedure.

            **Check**: Describe the checking procedure.'''
      tests: ["foo_feature2_test1",
              "foo_feature2_test2",

>               "foo_feature2_test3"]

Author: Done.

    }
    ...
  ]
```

### Covergroups

A list of covergroups documented in the testplan is presented as the planned
coverage model for the design. Minimally, the following items are sufficient to
adequately capture each covergroup:
* **name: name of the covergroup**

    This is a single `lower_snake_case` string that succinctly describes the
    covergroup. It needs to map to the actual written covergroup, so that it
    can be audited from the simulation results for tracking. As indicated in
    our DV style guide, the covergroup name is suffixed with `_cg`.

* **desc: description of the covergroup**

    A multi-line string that briefly describes what functionality is captured by

>     the covergroup. It is recommended, but not necessary to list the individual

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    the covergroup. It is recommended, but not necessary, to list the individual
```

>     coverpoints and crosses to make the coverage model review easy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    coverpoints and crosses to ease the coverage model review.
```

> Covergroups are added to the testplan using the `covergroups` key which is a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Covergroups are added to the testplan using the `covergroups` key, which is a
```

list that looks like this:
```hjson
  covergroups: [
    {
      name: timer_cg

>       desc: '''Cover various combinations rv_timer inputs when generating a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      desc: '''Cover various combinations of rv_timer inputs when generating a
```

      timeout. Cover appropriate ranges of values of step and prescaler as
      coverpoint buckets and cross them with each other.
      '''
    }
    ...
  ]
```
### Import shared testplans

> Typically, there are tests that are common to more that one testbench and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Typically, there are tests that are common to more than one testbench, and
```

can be made a part of a 'shared' testplan that each DUT testplan can simply
import. An example of this is running the automated UVM RAL CSR tests, which
applies to almost all DUTs. This can be done using the `import_testplans` key:
```hjson
  import_testplans: ["util/dvsim/testplanner/examples/common_testplan.hjson",
                     "hw/dv/tools/csr_testplan.hjson"]
```

Note that the paths to common testplans are relative to `$REPO_TOP`.

For the sake of discussion below, we will refer to the 'main' or DUT testplan
as 'DUT' testplan and the shared testplans it imports as 'shared' or 'imported'
testplans.

> The imported testplans actually present a problem - how can we set
> actual written tests that maps to the shared testplan entry generically

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The imported testplans actually present a problem - how can we set
actual written tests that maps to the shared testplan entry generically
```
```suggestion
The imported testplans actually present a problem: how can
actual tests that map to the shared testplan entry be generic
```

> The imported testplans actually present a problem - how can we set
> actual written tests that maps to the shared testplan entry generically

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The imported testplans actually present a problem: how can
actual tests that map to the shared testplan entry be generic
```

enough that they apply to more than one DUTs? We currently solve this by
providing wildcards, which are single `lower_snake_case` strings within
braces `'{..}'`. A substitution value (or list of values) for the wildcard
string can be optionally provided in the DUT testplan.  Here's an example:

```hjson
-------
  // UART testplan:
  name: uart

-------
  // Imported testplan:
  {
    name: csr
    ...
    tests: ["{name}{intf}_csr_hw_reset"]
  }
```

In the example above, `{name}` and `{intf}` are wildcards used in the
shared testplan for which substitution values are to be provided in the
DUT testplan.  When the tool parses the DUT testplan along with the

> imported testplans, it substitutes the wildcards with the substition

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
imported testplans, it substitutes the wildcards with the substitution
```

> values found in the DUT testplan.  If substitution is not available, then

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
values found in the DUT testplan.  If a substitution is not available
```

the wildcard is replaced with an empty string.  In the example above,

> the list of written test resolves to `["uart_csr_hw_reset"]` after

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the list of written tests resolves to `["uart_csr_hw_reset"]` after
```

in which case, the list of written tests will resolve to all values
being substituted. See example below for illustration:

```hjson
-------
  // Chip testplan:
  name: chip
  intf: ["", "_jtag"]
  foo: ["x", "y", "z"]

-------
  // Imported testplan:
  {
    name: csr
    ...
    tests: ["{name}{intf}_csr_hw_reset_{foo}"]
  }
```

This will resolve to the following 6 tests:

```
["chip_csr_hw_reset_x", "chip_csr_hw_reset_y", "chip_csr_hw_reset_z",
 "chip_jtag_csr_hw_reset_x", "chip_jtag_csr_hw_reset_y", "chip_jtag_csr_hw_reset_z"]
```

### Example sources

The following examples provided within `util/dvsim/examples/testplanner` can be
used as a starting point.
* **`foo_testplan.hjson`**: DUT testplan
* **`common_testplan.hjson`**: shared testplan imported within the DUT testplan
* **`foo_dv_doc.md`**: DUT testplan imported within the DV document doc in
  Markdown

In addition, see the [UART DV document]({{< relref "hw/ip/uart/doc/dv" >}}) for
a 'production' example of inline expansion of an imported testplan as a table
within the DV document.
The [UART testplan](https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan/blob/master/hw/ip/uart/data/uart_testplan.hjson)

> imports the shared testplans located at `hw/dv/tools/dvsim/testplans` area.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
imports some of the shared testplans located at `hw/dv/tools/dvsim/testplans`.
```

### Limitations

The following limitations currently hold:
* Only the DUT testplan can import shared testplans; the imported

>   testplans cannot further import more testplans

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  testplans cannot further import more testplans.
```

* All planned test names parsed from the DUT testplan and all of

>   its imported tetsplans need to be unique

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  its imported testplans need to be unique.
```

## Usage examples

### Standalone tool invocations

Generate the testplan table in HTML to stdout:
```console
$ cd $REPO_TOP
$ ./util/dvsim/testplanner.py \
    util/dvsim/examples/testplanner/foo_testplan.hjson
```

Generate the testplan table in HTML to a file:
```console
$ ./util/dvsim/testplanner.py \
    util/dvsim/examples/testplanner/foo_testplan.hjson \
    -o /tmp/foo_testplan_table.html
```

Generate simulation result tables in HTML to stdout:
```console
$ ./util/dvsim/testplanner.py \
    util/dvsim/examples/testplanner/foo_testplan.hjson \
    -s util/dvsim/examples/testplanner/foo_sim_results.hjson
```

> Generate simulation result tables in HTML to a file:

Reviewer 2: Could you comment on where the sim_results.hjson file will be found in actual runs?

```console
$ ./util/dvsim/testplanner.py \
    util/dvsim/examples/testplanner/foo_testplan.hjson \
    -s util/dvsim/examples/testplanner/foo_sim_results.hjson \
    -o /tmp/foo_sim_results.html
```

### APIs for external tools
The `util/build_docs.py` script invokes the testplanner utility functions

> directly to parse the Hjson testplan and insert a HTML table within the DV

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
directly to parse the Hjson testplan and insert an HTML table within the DV
```

plan document. This is done by invoking:

```console
$ ./util/build_docs.py --preview
```
The output for each testplan will be saved into `build/docs-generated`.
For example the path to the GPIO IP testplan is
`build/docs-generated/hw/ip/gpio/data/gpio_testplan.hjson.testplan`.

See following snippet of code for the APIs in use:
```python
from dvsim.Testplan import Testplan

  # hjson_testplan_path: a string pointing to the path to Hjson testplan
  testplan = Testplan(hjson_testplan_path)
  text = testplan.get_testplan_table("html")

> ```

Reviewer: I'd suggest just pointing at some code that uses the APIs. Otherwise, you have to remember to update this document if the APIs change and nothing will break if you don't. In my experience, I **always** forget, so think it's better not to need to worry about it :-)

## Future work

> * Allow DUT and imported DV plans have the same name for the planned test as

Reviewer: Nit: plans **to** have

Maybe file issues to track these planned changes? Personally, I think this sort of "future plans" list fits better with an issue tracker than a checked-in file (because our plans might change!). But I'm happy to duplicate the list if that's what you prefer.

> * Allow DUT and imported DV plans have the same name for the planned test as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Allow DUT and imported DV plans have the same name for some planned test as
```

>   long as they are in separate files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  long as they are in separate files.
```

>   * If the same name exists, then append the list of tests together

Reviewer 2: ... append the base name of the imported plan file? Like csr_testplan_csr_rw?

* Split the simulation results table generation into a separate `dashboard_gen`

>   script which will also cater to generating results table for `lint` and `fpv`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  script which will also generate results table for `lint` and `fpv`.
```

Author: Line removed.
